[RFC] Karpenter v1 API & Roadmap Proposal (#1222)
kubernetes-sigs/karpenter: designs/v1-roadmap.md

Users have asked that we make this a configurable field so that they can tweak whether we keep nodes around for longer when they are underutilized before we make a consolidation decision to terminate them. To do this, we will have to change our synchronous waiting mechanism to some other mechanism that will allow us to perform longer waits.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Design and implement a `spec.consolidateAfter` field for the v1 NodePool API, reworking our synchronous wait to ensure that waiting for nodes that haven’t reached the end of their `consolidateAfter` timeframe doesn’t block other disruption evaluation

### Change Expiration from Graceful to Forceful

**Issue/RFC Ref:** https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/pull/1303

**Category:** Breaking

> Users care about the removal of their nodes within a certain timeframe due to security requirements. Budgets, `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` pods and blocking PDBs should not stop us from starting the drain of the node after it exceeds its expireAfter value. Once a node has begun evicting, it will remain on the cluster up to its t`erminationGracePeriod` duration (assuming there are blocking PDBs or pods that are running with the `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` annotation) and then be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users care about the removal of their nodes within a certain timeframe due to security requirements. Budgets, `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` pods and blocking PDBs should not stop us from starting the drain of the node after it exceeds its expireAfter value. Once a node has begun evicting, it will remain on the cluster up to its `terminationGracePeriod` duration (assuming there are blocking PDBs or pods that are running with the `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` annotation) and then be removed.
```

### Stabilize Observability (metrics, status, eventing)

**Issue Ref:** https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/1051

**Category:** Breaking, Stability

Karpenter needs to stabalize a set of metrics, status conditions, and events that can be relied-upon for monitoring. The design for these metrics, status conditions and events will be added in a separate RFC.

### Stabilize Karpenter’s Tainting Logic

**Issue Ref:** https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/624, https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/1049

> **Category:** Breaking

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't align on `node-lifecycle.kubernetes.io/do-not-disrupt` until it's registered with Kubernetes (see https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/ for the list  - you just need a PR against that page to add a registered thing).

So, an easy prerequisite to meet, but still something to remember to do.

> **Category:** Breaking

Author: > do we plan on [aligning](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rHhltfLV5V1kcnKr_mKRKDC4ZFPYGP4Tde2Zy-LE72w/edit) with cas on some of the taints and annotations for v1 as well? Or is this work still in discussion phase

There is an [open issue on this upstream.](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/6648) We've been actively having some conversations around what makes sense here, but I imagine that, yes, this will be part of the taint redesign so that we don't break everyone twice.

Since the discussion was still ongoing and nothing was set in stone yet, I didn't want to specifically scope it into this item; though, I can add a little bit to make mention to it.

> Karpenter wants to expand the usage of the `karpenter.sh/disruption=disrupting:NoSchedule` taint that it currently leverages to cordon nodes during disruption, to also taint nodes with a `karpenterh.sh/disruption-candidate:NoSchedule` taint. By tainting nodes when they become candidates (past expiry, drifted, etc.), we ensure that we will launch new nodes when we get more pods that join the cluster, reducing the chance that we will continue to get `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` pods that continue to schedule to the same node.

Reviewer 3: nitlord comment.

We need to define a mechanism for communicating breaking changes to the library to projects that rely on it. This library is similar to something like `controller-runtime` , where the library is versioned independent of the projects that rely on it. Starting in v1, we should adopt a versioning scheme similar to this, that decouples the AWS release version from the neutral library version.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Create a design doc for defining a versioning strategy for `kubernetes-sigs/karpenter` and cloud provider repos. Begin adhering to this strategy starting in v1

### NodeClaim Conceptual Documentation

**Issue Ref:** https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/issues/5144

**Category:** Stability

Karpenter currently has no conceptual documentation around NodeClaims. NodeClaims have become a fundamental part of how Karpenter launches and manages nodes. There is critical observability information that is stored inside of the NodeClaim that can help users understand when certain disruption conditions are met (Expired, Empty, Drifted) or why the NodeClaim fails to launch.

> For Karpenter’s feature completeness at v1, we need to accurately describe to users what the purpose of Karpenter’s NodeClaims are and how to leverage the information that is stored within the NodeClaim to troubleshoot Karpenter’s decision-making.

Author: Agreed. I wasn't directly scoping in #894 to the v1 work, but @sanjeevrg89 volunteered himself to start adding some architecture diagrams to the upstream docs. This should include the NodeClaim lifecycle controller and should hopefully a lot of the detail to outside contributors about how each of the Karpenter controllers interacts with the system.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Add a NodeClaim doc to the “Concepts” section of the documentation

> ### Drop Knative References from the Code

Reviewer 3: cc: @comtalyst

> ### Drop Knative References from the Code

Reviewer 3: cc: @comtalyst

Because Karpenter is not waiting, the node fails to properly deregister, leaking [daemonsets](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/655) and [node leases](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/issues/4363) onto the cluster. By waiting for instance termination before fully deleting the node, we are allowing the node to go through its graceful shutdown process.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Implement a retry mechanism to ensure that the instance is fully terminated before removing the Node and the NodeClaim from the cluster
- [ ] Validate and remove the current lease garbage collection controller from `kubernetes-sigs/karpenter`, removing the permission on node leases in the `kube-node-lease` namespace

### Drift Hash Breaking Change Handling

**Issue Ref(s):** https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/957

**Category:** Stability

Karpenter currently relies on a hash to determine whether certain fields in Karpenter’s NodeClaims have drifted from their owning NodePool and owning EC2NodeClass. Today, this is determined by hashing a set of fields on the NodePool or EC2NodeClass and then validating that this hash still matches the NodeClaim’s hash.

> This hashing mechanism works well for additive changes to the API, but does not work well when adding fields to the hashing function that already have a set value on a customer’s cluster. In particular, we have a need to make breaking changes to this hash scheme from these two issues: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/karpenter/issues/909 and https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/issues/5447.

Author: I'm not sure I follow your question. Are you asking if a user overriding the default value will work? It will work as it normally should -- it should trigger drift and nodes should roll in response to the update

Karpenter has [used knative](https://github.com/knative/pkg) from the beginning of the project. knative’s pkg libraries were only intended for their own use and were not intended to be used widely by the community. Because knative relies on and generates so much of the upstream API, attempting to bump to a newer version of client-go (or any other upstream k8s package) without having knative pkg pinned to that same version causes incompatibilities. Practically, this means that we can be bottlenecked on older versions of k8s libraries while we are waiting on knative to update its own dependencies. [Knative has a slower release cycle than Karpenter](https://github.com/knative/community/blob/main/mechanics/RELEASE-SCHEDULE.md#upcoming-releases) so we need to avoid these bottlenecks while we have the opportunity to make breaking changes to the API.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Remove the knative logger and replace with the controller-runtime logger
- [ ] Update the status condition schema for Karpenter CustomResources to use the [metav1 status condition schema](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/f14778da5523847e4c07346e3161a4b4f6c9186e/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L1523)

> ### Drop Knative Webhook from Karpenter

Reviewer: I think we should call out that this is for validation only. 
```suggestion
### Drop Knative Webhook for Validation from Karpenter
```

Author: Plan is to drop this long-term generally so I'm fine to have this here since we are definitely going to be fully dropping this in v1.1

#### Tasks

- [ ] Drop the webhook, removing the `knative/pkg` dependency from the Karpenter controller package

### Promoting Drift Feature to Stable

**Category:** Stability

Karpenter supported drift in its alpha state from v0.21-v0.32. During alpha, we worked to build out features and promoted drift to beta after releasing full drift support for all Karpenter configuration. Since releasing drift in beta, we’ve received no feedback that would lead us to believe the feature is unstable or not the right direction for the declarative state of Karpenter.

Since the feature is such a fundamental part to how the declarative state of Karpenter functions, we will promote drift to stable at Karpenter v1.

#### Tasks

- [ ] Remove `Drift` as a feature flag, always enabling it in Karpenter

> ### Change default TopologySpreadConstraint policy for Deployment from `ScheduleAnyways` to `DoNotSchedule` [AWS CloudProvider]

Reviewer: Should we consider making an RFC for AWS provider in that repo? I'm not sure this makes much sense in the k8s-sigs context
